📖 KCP remediation proposal (#3676)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/proposals/20191017-kubeadm-based-control-plane.md

- To manage control plane deployments across failure domains.
- To support user-initiated remediation:
  E.g. user deletes a Machine. Control Plane Provider reconciles by removing the corresponding etcd member and updating related metadata

> - To support auto remediation triggered by MachineHealthCheck objects:

Reviewer: I kind of wish it was a little smarter, but maybe we can split control plane vs worker nodes health checker later in v1alpha4 after #3547

> - To support auto remediation triggered by MachineHealthCheck objects:

Author: I agree, but IMO in order to address this we should extend MHC to observe machine conditions, so we could benefit on CAPI conditions for worker nodes as well

> - To support auto remediation triggered by MachineHealthCheck objects:
>   E.g. a MachineHealthCheck marks a machine for remediation. Control Plane Provider reconciles by removing the machine and replace it with a new one
>   **only if** this operation is not potentially destructive for the cluster (e.g. the operation could cause a permanent quorum loss).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To support auto remediation triggered by MachineHealthCheck objects:
  E.g. a MachineHealthCheck marks a machine for remediation. Control Plane Provider reconciles by removing the machine and replaces it with a new one
  **if and only if** the operation is not potentially destructive for the cluster (e.g. the operation could cause a permanent quorum loss).
```

    - Scale up control plane creating a machine with the new spec
    - Scale down control plane by removing one of the machine that needs rollout (the oldest out-of date machine in the failure domain that has the most control-plane machines on it)
    

> - In order to determine if a Machine need rollouts KCP implements the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In order to determine if a Machine needs to be rolled out, KCP implements the following:
```

    
- The controller should tolerate the manual or automatic removal of a replica during the upgrade process. A replica that fails during the upgrade may block the completion of the upgrade. Removal or other remedial action may be necessary to allow the upgrade to complete.

###### Constraints and Assumptions

* A stable endpoint (provided by DNS or IP) for the API server will be required in order to allow for machines to maintain a connection to control plane machines as they are swapped out during upgrades. This proposal is agnostic to how this is achieved, and is being tracked in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/1687. The control plane controller will use the presence of the apiEndpoints status field of the cluster object to  determine whether or not to proceed. This behaviour is currently implicit in the implementations for cloud providers that provider a load balancer construct.

* Infrastructure templates are expected to be immutable, so infrastructure template contents do not have to hashed in order to detect
  changes.
   
##### Remediation (using delete-and-recreate)

> - KCP remediation is triggered by the MachineHealthCheck controller marking a machine for remediation. see 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- KCP remediation is triggered by the MachineHealthCheck controller marking a machine for remediation. See 
```

  [machine-health-checking proposal](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/11485f4f817766c444840d8ea7e4e7d1a6b94cc9/docs/proposals/20191030-machine-health-checking.md)

>   for additional details. When there are multiple machines that are marked for remediation, the oldest one will be remediate first.

Reviewer: Is this true in any case? What if the oldest one shouldn't be remediated because it could impact quorum?

Author: I agree this is not optimal, but this is by far the simplest solution and so I would advocate this is an acceptable solution for the first iteration on KCP remediations, unless there are evidences that multiple remediations with concurrent sparse etcd failures is a frequent use cases.
However, if during the implementation we find a smarter way to determine the machine to remediate, I will more than happy to amend this proposal ....

  
- Following rules should be satisfied in order to start remediation

>   - The cluster MUST have at least 3 machines, because this is the smallest cluster size that allows any etcd failure tolerance.

Reviewer: > MUST have at least 3 machines

Let's define this a little more, is this `spec.replicas >= 3`, should the count exclude deleting machines? And so on.

Author: it is spec.replicas >= 3; the cluster MUST have no deleting machines is detailed as a separated point

  - The number of replicas MUST be equal to or greater than the desired replicas. This rule ensures that when the cluster
    is missing replicas, we skip remediation and instead perform regular scale up/rollout operations first. 

>   - The cluster MUST have no deleting machines. This rule prevents KCP taking actions while the cluster is in a transitional state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The cluster MUST have no machines with a deletion timestamp. This rule prevents KCP taking actions while the cluster is in a transitional state.
```

  - Remediation MUST preserve etcd quorum. This rule ensures that we will not remove a member that would result in etcd
    losing a majority of members and thus become unable to field new requests.

- When all the conditions for stating remediaiton are satisfied, KCP temporarily suspend any operation in progress
  in order to perform remediation. 
- Remediation will be performed by issuing a delete on the unhealthy machine; after deleting the machine, KCP
  will restore the target number of machines by triggering a scale up (current replicas<desired replicas) and then

>   eventually restart the rollout action.

Reviewer: We might want to say `resume` instead of restart?

>   eventually restart the rollout action.

Author: Ok for resume (and this happens eventually as described in scenario 4)

  See [why delete and recreate](#why-delete-and-recreate) for an explanation about why KCP should remove the member first and then add its replacement.

###### Why delete and recreate

When replacing a KCP machine the most critical component to be taken into account is etcd, and
according to the [etcd documentation](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/blob/master/Documentation/faq.md#should-i-add-a-member-before-removing-an-unhealthy-member),
it's important to remove an unhealthy etcd member first and then add its replacement:

_etcd employs distributed consensus based on a quorum model; (n/2)+1 members, a majority, must agree on a proposal before

> it can be committed to the cluster. These proposals include key-value updates and membership changes. This model totally
> avoids any possibility of split brain inconsistency. The downside is permanent quorum loss is catastrophic._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it can be committed to the cluster. These proposals include key-value updates and membership changes. This model
avoids potential split brain inconsistencies. The downside is permanent quorum loss is catastrophic._
```

_How this applies to membership: If a 3-member cluster has 1 downed member, it can still make forward progress because
the quorum is 2 and 2 members are still live. However, adding a new member to a 3-member cluster will increase the quorum
to 3 because 3 votes are required for a majority of 4 members. Since the quorum increased, this extra member buys nothing
in terms of fault tolerance; the cluster is still one node failure away from being unrecoverable._

> _Additionally, that new member is risky because it may turn out to be misconfigured or incapable of joining the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Additionally, adding new members to an unhealthy control plane might be risky because it may turn out to be misconfigured or incapable of joining the cluster.
```

> _Additionally, that new member is risky because it may turn out to be misconfigured or incapable of joining the cluster.

Reviewer 2: If the 4th member could not join the cluster, that means it did not become a member? So the quorum is still 2.

```suggestion
_Additionally, that new member is risky because it may turn out to be misconfigured.
```

If the 4th one did not join to the cluster, then it is not a member and the quorum is still 2?

Author: The 4th etcd node should be Added to the member list before the new member actually starts.
Given that his operation alters the quorom before the join, we should consider as well the case join fails.
(BTW, this is an extract from the etcd docs)

In that case, there's no way to recover quorum because the cluster has two members down and two members up, but needs
three votes to change membership to undo the botched membership addition. etcd will by default reject member
add attempts that could take down the cluster in this manner._

_On the other hand, if the downed member is removed from cluster membership first, the number of members becomes 2 and
the quorum remains at 2. Following that removal by adding a new member will also keep the quorum steady at 2. So, even

> if the new node can't be brought up, it's still possible to remove the new member through quorum on the remaining live members._

Reviewer: We'll need to make sure to prioritize nodes that have unhealthy etcd members instead of any or the oldest unhealthy machine to achieve this

Author: see https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/3676#discussion_r492975642

> if the new node can't be brought up, it's still possible to remove the new member through quorum on the remaining live members._

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
if the new node can't be brought up, it's still possible to remove the new member through quorum on the remaining live members.
```

> As a consequence KCP remediation should remove unhealthy machine first and then add its replacement.

Reviewer: Can we make these bullet points instead of italic?

Additionally, in order to make this approach more robust, KCP will test each etcd member for responsiveness before
using the Status endpoint and determine as best as possible that we would not exceed failure tolerance by removing a machine.

> This should ensure we are taking actions in case there are other etcd members not properly working on machines

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This should ensure we are not taking actions in case there are other etcd members not properly working on machines
```

not (yet) marked for remediation by the MachineHealthCheck.

> ###### Scenario 1: Three replicas, one machine marked for remediation
> If an MHC will mark one machine for remediation in a control-plane with three replicas, we will look at the etcd

Reviewer: ```suggestion
###### Scenario 1: Three replicas, one machine marked for remediation

If an MHC will mark one machine for remediation in a control-plane with three replicas, we will look at the etcd
```

> If an MHC will mark one machine for remediation in a control-plane with three replicas, we will look at the etcd
> status of each machine to determine if we have at most one failed member. Assuming the etcd cluster is still all healthy, 
> or the only unresponsive member is the one to be remediated, we will scale down the machine that failed the MHC and
> then scale up a new machine to replace it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If MachineHealthCheck marks one machine for remediation in a control-plane with three replicas, we will look at the etcd
status of each machine to determine if we have at most one failed member. Assuming the etcd cluster is still all healthy, 
or the only unresponsive member is the one to be remediated, we will scale down the machine that failed the MHC and
then scale up a new machine to replace it.
```

> ###### Scenario 2: Three replicas, two machines marked for remediation
> If an MHC will mark two machines for remediation in a control-plane with three replicas, remediation might happen

Reviewer: ```suggestion
###### Scenario 2: Three replicas, two machines marked for remediation

If an MHC will mark two machines for remediation in a control-plane with three replicas, remediation might happen
```

> If an MHC will mark two machines for remediation in a control-plane with three replicas, remediation might happen
> depending on the status of the etcd members on the three replicas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If MachineHealthCheck marks two machines for remediation in a control-plane with three replicas, remediation might happen
depending on the status of the etcd members on the three replicas.
```

As long as we continue to only have at most one unhealthy etcd member, we will scale down an unhealthy machine, 
wait for it to provision and join the cluster, and then scale down the other machine.

However, if more than one etcd member is unhealthy, remediation would not happen and manual intervention would be required
to fix the unhealthy machine.

> ###### Scenario 3: Three replicas, one unresponsive etcd member, one (different) unhealthy machine
> It is possible to have a scenario where a different machine than the one that failed the MHC has an unresponsive etcd. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
###### Scenario 3: Three replicas, one unresponsive etcd member, one (different) unhealthy machine

It is possible to have a scenario where a different machine than the one that failed the MHC has an unresponsive etcd. 
```

> In this scenario, remediation would not happen and manual intervention would be required to fix the unhealthy machine.

Reviewer: This makes sense, although we might want to revisit it in the future to allow to get to scenario 2

Author: agreed, see https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/3676#discussion_r492975642

> ###### Scenario 4: Unhealthy machines combined with rollout
> When there exist unhealthy machines and there also have been configuration changes that trigger a rollout of new machines to occur, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
###### Scenario 4: Unhealthy machines combined with rollout

When there exist unhealthy machines and there also have been configuration changes that trigger a rollout of new machines to occur, 
```

remediation and rollout will occur in tandem. 

This is to say that unhealthy machines will first be scaled down, and replaced with new machines that match the desired new spec. 
Once the unhealthy machines have been replaced, the remaining healthy machines will also be replaced one-by-one as well to complete the rollout operation.
 
##### Health checks

> Nb. This paragraph describes KCP health checks specifically designed to ensure a kubeadm 
> generated control-plane is stable before proceeding with KCP actions like scale up, scale down and rollout. 
> KCP health checks are different from the one implemented by the MachineHealthCheck controller.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> NOTE: This paragraph describes KCP health checks specifically designed to ensure a kubeadm 
generated control-plane is stable before proceeding with KCP actions like scale up, scale down and rollout. 
KCP health checks are different from the one implemented by the MachineHealthCheck controller.  
```
